README.md, before:

# Homework_4

Due December 7, 12pm.
Homework must be uploaded to a new GitHub repository you create specifically for Homework 4. Submission of the link to the repository suffices for submitting the homework. Please don't submit real paper. Please use either markdown a file or a mix of a markdown file and scripts to answer your homework. One markdown file should serve as the "master file" describing your answers and which files have the code that demonstrate your answers (if necessary). Remember, markdown itself can display code snippets. The timestamp of your files will serve to determine whether your assignment is on time.

## Summarize partitions of a genome assembly
We will be revisiting the Drosophila melanogaster genome. As with Homework 3, start at flybase.org. Go to the most current download genomes section and download the gzipped fasta file for all chromosomes.
Hint: The partitioning can be accomplished in many different ways. In my opinion, the easiest way is by using bioawk and faSize. The bioawk tool can be found in the module jje/jjeutils and the fa* utilities can be found in the module jje/kent.

```sh
qrsh
cd /pub/jje/ee282/${USER}
mkdir hmwk4
cd hmwk4
wget ftp://ftp.flybase.net/genomes/Drosophila_melanogaster/current/fasta/dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta.gz                         

# Unzip
ls 
gunzip *.gz

# download bioawk and faSize
module load jje/jjeutils/0.1a
module load jje/kent/2014.02.19
```


### Calculate the following for all sequences ≤ 100kb and all sequences > 100kb:
1. Total number of nucleotides
2. Total number of Ns
3. Total number of sequences

Because the calculations will be for two genome partitions, there will be **6 total responses**.

1. Total number of nucleotides
```sh
ls

# Need to first partition the genomes to ≤ 100kb and > 100kb
# First for ≤ 100kb

faFilter -maxSize=100000 dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta \
> faSize dmel_less.fasta

# For > 100kb
faFilter -minSize=100001 dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta \
> faSize dmel_more.fasta
ls


# Trying another way for partition (will only use faSize partition version for remaining homework):
bioawk -c fastx 'length($seq) <= 100000{ print ">"$name; print $seq }'  *.fasta \
> sample_less 
bioawk -c fastx 'length($seq) > 100000{ print ">"$name; print $seq }'  *.fasta \
> sample_more

# To calculate total nucleotides, Ns, and sequences
faSize dmel_less.fasta
faSize dmel_more.fasta

# Another way to solve for total number of nucleotides
bioawk -c fastx '{ print $name, length($seq) }' dmel_less.fasta
bioawk -c fastx '{ print $name, length($seq) }' dmel_more.fasta

# Another way to solve for total number of Ns
bioawk -t -c fastx 'END {print NR}' dmel_less.fasta
bioawk -t -c fastx 'END {print NR}' dmel_more.fasta

```
**For ≤ 100 kb**
1. Total nucleotides: 6178042
2. Total Ns: 662593
3. Total sequences: 1863

**For > 100 kb**
1. Total nucleotides: 137547960
2. Total Ns: 490385
3. Total sequences: 7


## Plots of the following for the whole genome, for all sequences ≤ 100kb, and all sequences > 100kb:

**Hint:** bioawk has a function called gc(). Don't forget about the CDF plotting utility we used in class.
1. Sequence length distribution
2. Sequence GC% distribution
3. Cumulative genome size sorted from largest to smallest sequences

Because the calculations will be for the whole genome and two genome partitions, there will be **9 total plots**.

### Sequence Length Distribution
```sh
module load perl
module load jje/jjeutils/0.1a
module load rstudio/0.99.9.9

# sequence length distribution 
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel_less.fasta > leng_less.txt
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel_more.fasta > leng_more.txt
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta > leng_whole.txt

R
library(ggplot2)

# ≤ 100 kb
leng_less <- read.table("leng_less.txt", header = FALSE)
View(leng_less) # If you are running in X2go, good to look at data and make sure the formatting looks correct
leng_less$seq_Percentcut <-cut(x=leng_less[,1], breaks = 750)
ggplot(data = leng_less)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(seq_Percentcut)) + labs(title="Sequence Length ≤ 100kb", x="Sequence", y="Count (Number of Contigs)")+ theme_bw()+ theme(axis.text.x = element_text (angle = 90, hjust = 1)) 
ggsave("leng_less.png")

# > 100 kb

leng_more <- read.table("leng_more.txt", header = FALSE)
View(leng_more) # If you are running in X2go, good to look at data and make sure the formatting looks correct
leng_more$seq_Percentcut <-cut(x=leng_more[,1], breaks = 17)
ggplot(data = leng_more)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(seq_Percentcut)) + labs(title="Sequence Length > 100kb", x="Sequence", y="Count (Number of Contigs)")+ theme_bw()+ theme(axis.text.x = element_text (angle = 90, hjust = 1))  
ggsave("leng_more.png")

# whole genome

leng_whole <- read.table("leng_whole.txt", header = FALSE)
View(leng_whole) # If you are running in X2go, good to look at data and make sure the formatting looks correct
leng_whole$seq_Percentcut <-cut(x=leng_whole[,1], breaks = 100000)
ggplot(data = leng_whole)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(seq_Percentcut)) + labs(title="Whole Genome Sequence Length", x="Sequence", y="Count (Number of Contigs)")+ theme_bw()+ theme(axis.text.x = element_text (angle = 90, hjust = 1))  
ggsave("leng_whole.png")

q()
```

### GC% Distribution

```sh
# GC% Distribution

module load jje/jjeutils/0.1a
module load rstudio/0.99.9.9

# Need to first generate GC txt files for all of them before going into R
# ≤ 100kb
bioawk -c fastx '{ print $name, gc($seq) }' dmel_less.fasta > GC_less.txt

# > 100kb
bioawk -c fastx '{ print $name, gc($seq) }' dmel_more.fasta > GC_more.txt

# whole genome 
bioawk -c fastx '{ print $name, gc($seq) }' dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta > GC_whole.txt

R # everything hereafter should be in R
library(ggplot2)

# GC for ≤ 100 kb
GC_less <- read.table("GC_less.txt", header = FALSE)
View(GC_less) # If you are running in X2go, good to look at data and make sure the formatting looks correct
GC_less$GC_Percentcut <-cut(x=GC_less[,2], breaks = 11)
View(GC_less)
ggplot(data = GC_less)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(GC_Percentcut)) + labs(title="GC Distribution ≤ 100kb", x="GC Percentage", y="Count (Number of Contigs)") 
ggsave("GC_less.png")

# GC for > 100 kb
GC_more <- read.table("GC_more.txt", header = FALSE)
View(GC_more)
GC_more$GC_Percentcut <-cut(x=GC_more[,2], breaks = 11)
View(GC_more)
ggplot(data = GC_more)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(GC_Percentcut)) + labs(title="GC Distribution > 100kb", x="GC Percentage", y="Count (Number of Contigs)") 
ggsave("GC_more.png")

# GC for whole genome
GC_whole <- read.table("GC_whole.txt", header = FALSE)
View(GC_whole) 
GC_whole$GC_Percentcut <-cut(x=GC_whole[,2], breaks = 15)
View(GC_whole)
ggplot(data = GC_whole)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(GC_Percentcut)) + labs(title="Whole Genome GC Distribution", x="GC Percentage", y="Count (Number of Contigs)") 
ggsave("GC_whole.png")

q()
```

### Cumulative Genome Size Distribution 
```sh
# Cumulative genome size largest to smallest
# ≤ 100kb
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel_less.fasta \
| sort -rn \
| awk ' BEGIN { print "Assembly\tLength\nkblength_Ctg\t0" } { print "kblength_Ctg\t" $1 } ' \
>  seq_dmel_less.lengths
plotCDF2 seq_dmel_less.lengths seq_less.png

# > 100kb
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel_more.fasta \
| sort -rn \
| awk ' BEGIN { print "Assembly\tLength\nkblength_Ctg\t0" } { print "kblength_Ctg\t" $1 } ' \
>  seq_dmel_more.lengths
plotCDF2 seq_dmel_more.lengths seq_more.png

# whole genome
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta \
| sort -rn \
| awk ' BEGIN { print "Assembly\tLength\nkblength_Ctg\t0" } { print "kblength_Ctg\t" $1 } ' \
>  seq_dmel_all.lengths
plotCDF2 seq_dmel_all.lengths seq_all.png

ls -l *.png # There should be 9

```
# Genome Assembly

## Assemble a genome from MinION reads
**Hint:** Read up on miniasm here. We're using one of the simplest assembly approaches possible. This assembly can literally be accomplished with three lines of code. This will literally take only 3 command lines.
Download the reads from here
Use minimap to overlap reads
Use miniasm to construct an assembly

```sh
pwd
mkdir assembly
cd assembly

### THIS PART TAKES A RIDICULOUSLY LONG TIME
module load jje/jjeutils
wget https://hpc.oit.uci.edu/~solarese/ee282/iso1_onp_a2_1kb.fastq.gz 
# Trying script from class
minimap=$(which minimap)
miniasm=$(which miniasm)
basedir=/pub/jje/ee282/$USER
projname=nanopore_assembly1
basedir=$basedir/$projname
raw=$basedir/$projname/data/raw
processed=$basedir/$projname/data/processed
figures=$basedir/$projname/output/figures
reports=$basedir/$projname/output/reports

createProject $projname $basedir
ln -sf /bio/share/solarese/hw4/rawdata/iso1_onp_a2_1kb.fastq $raw/reads.fq

$minimap -t 32 -Sw5 -L100 -m0 $raw/reads.fq{,} \
| gzip -1 \
> $processed/onp.paf.gz

$miniasm -f $raw/reads.fq $processed/onp.paf.gz \
> $processed/reads.gfa

```

## Assembly assessment
**Hint:** For MUMmer, you should run nucmer, delta-filter, and mummerplot.
1. Calculate the N50 of your assembly (this can be done with only faSize+awk+sort or with bioawk+awk+sort) and compare it to the Drosophila community reference's contig N50 (here)

```sh
# For calculating n50
n50 () {
  bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq); n=n+length($seq); } END { print n; } ' $1 \
  | sort -rn \
  | gawk ' NR == 1 { n = $1 }; NR > 1 { ni = $1 + ni; } ni/n > 0.5 { print $1; exit; } '
}

awk ' $0 ~/^S/ { print ">" $2" \n" $3 } ' $processed/reads.gfa \
| tee >(n50 /dev/stdin > $reports/n50.txt) \
| fold -w 60 \
> $processed/unitigs.fa

n50 dmell-all-cntg-r6.24.fa # should give you n50 number; In our case it is 21485538, need to first jump ahead to next question to generate the contig assembly

```
2. Compare your assembly to the contig assembly (not the scaffold assembly!) from Drosophila melanogaster on FlyBase using a dotplot constructed with MUMmer (Hint: use faSplitByN as demonstrated in class)

```sh
# Need to first make a contig assembly

module load jje/jjeutils perl
faSplitByN dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta dmel-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24.fasta 10

# Will do mummer in another folder as a job
mkdir mummer
ln -s /pub/jje/ee282/bsorouri/nanopore_assembly1/nanopore_assembly1/data/processed/unitigs.fa
ln -s /pub/jje/ee282/bsorouir/hmwk4/dmell-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24.fasta
ls
touch mummer.sh
nano mummer.sh # Copy and paste the content below into your shell script, afterwards save and exit out of shell script

#!/bin/bash
#
#$ -N mummer
#$ -q free128,free72i,free56i,free48i,free40i,free32i,free64
#$ -pe openmp 8
#$ -R Y

###Loading of binaries via module load or PATH reassignment
source /pub/jje/ee282/bin/.qmbashrc
module load gnuplot/4.6.0

###Query and Reference Assignment. State my prefix for output filenames
REF="dmel-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24.fasta"
PREFIX="flybase"
SGE_TASK_ID=1
QRY=$(ls u*.fa | head -n $SGE_TASK_ID | tail -n 1)
PREFIX=${PREFIX}_$(basename ${QRY} .fa)

###please use a value between 75-150 for -c. The value of 1000 is too strict.
nucmer -l 100 -c 125 -d 10 -banded -D 5 -prefix ${PREFIX} ${REF} ${QRY}
mummerplot --fat --layout --filter -p ${PREFIX} ${PREFIX}.delta \
  -R ${REF} -Q ${QRY} --png


#### This is after you saved and exited out ######

qsub mummer.sh

```

3. Compare your assembly to both the contig assembly and the scaffold assembly from the Drosophila melanogaster on FlyBase using a contiguity plot (Hint: use plotCDF2 as demonstrated in class and see this example)

```sh
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24.fasta \
| sort -rn \
| awk ' BEGIN { print "Assembly\tLength\nFlyBase_Ctg\t0" } { print "FlyBase_Ctg\t" $1 } ' \
>  dmel-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24.lengths

bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' unitigs.fa \
| sort -rn \
| awk ' BEGIN { print "Assembly\tLength\nMinimap_Ctg\t0" } { print "Minimap_Ctg\t" $1 } ' \
> unitigs.lengths

plotCDF2 {dmel-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24,unitigs}.lengths r6_v_minimap.png  
```

4. Calculate BUSCO scores of both assemblies and compare them

```sh

pwd # make sure you are in hmwk4 directory
touch busco_final8.sh
nano busco_final8.sh ##### Input and save the code below

#!/bin/bash
#
#$ -N busco8
#$ -q free128,free72i,free56i,free48i,free40i,free32i,free64
#$ -pe openmp 8
#$ -R Y
module load augustus/3.2.1
module load blast/2.2.31 hmmer/3.1b2 boost/1.54.0
source /pub/jje/ee282/bin/.buscorc

INPUTTYPE="geno"
MYLIBDIR="/pub/jje/ee282/bin/busco/lineages/"
MYLIB="diptera_odb9"
OPTIONS="-l ${MYLIBDIR}${MYLIB}"
##OPTIONS="${OPTIONS} -sp 4577"
QRY="unitigs.fa"
MYEXT=".fa" ###Please change this based on your qry file. I.e. .fasta or .fa or .gfa

#my busco run
##BUSCO.py -c 1 ${NSLOTS} -i ${QRY} -m ${INPUTTYPE} -o $(basename ${QRY} ${MYEXT})_${MYLIB}${SPTAG} ${OPTIONS}
BUSCO.py -f -c 1 -i ${QRY} -m ${INPUTTYPE} -o $(basename ${QRY} ${MYEXT})_${MYLIB}${SPTAG} ${OPTIONS}

################# After Saving And Exiting Out #####################

qsub busco_final8.sh
# Note: I used 8 nodes, because it was taking forever in the queue. It took longer to complete, but it still got done.

#### Alternative, manual way of running busco:
# Need to be careful how we log on and off, but can do the above script manually by first putting the code below, then continuing with the remainder of the code:
qrsh -q free128,free72i,free56i,free48i,free40i,free32i,free64 -pe openmp 32


```
**BUSCO Score Results:**

Results:

C:0.5%[S:0.5%,D:0.0%],F:1.1%,M:98.4%,n:2799

13 Complete BUSCOs (C)

13 Complete and single-copy BUSCOs (S)

0 Complete and duplicated BUSCOs (D)

32 Fragmented BUSCOs (F)

2754 Missing BUSCOs (M)

2799 Total BUSCO groups searched

Commit message:

Graded "Summarize partitions of a genome assembly"

README.md, after:

# Homework_4

Due December 7, 12pm.
Homework must be uploaded to a new GitHub repository you create specifically for Homework 4. Submission of the link to the repository suffices for submitting the homework. Please don't submit real paper. Please use either markdown a file or a mix of a markdown file and scripts to answer your homework. One markdown file should serve as the "master file" describing your answers and which files have the code that demonstrate your answers (if necessary). Remember, markdown itself can display code snippets. The timestamp of your files will serve to determine whether your assignment is on time.

## Summarize partitions of a genome assembly
We will be revisiting the Drosophila melanogaster genome. As with Homework 3, start at flybase.org. Go to the most current download genomes section and download the gzipped fasta file for all chromosomes.
Hint: The partitioning can be accomplished in many different ways. In my opinion, the easiest way is by using bioawk and faSize. The bioawk tool can be found in the module jje/jjeutils and the fa* utilities can be found in the module jje/kent.

```sh
qrsh
cd /pub/jje/ee282/${USER}
mkdir hmwk4
cd hmwk4
wget ftp://ftp.flybase.net/genomes/Drosophila_melanogaster/current/fasta/dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta.gz                         

# Unzip
ls 
gunzip *.gz

# download bioawk and faSize
module load jje/jjeutils/0.1a
module load jje/kent/2014.02.19
```


### Calculate the following for all sequences ≤ 100kb and all sequences > 100kb:
1. Total number of nucleotides
2. Total number of Ns
3. Total number of sequences

Because the calculations will be for two genome partitions, there will be **6 total responses**.

1. Total number of nucleotides
```sh
ls

# Need to first partition the genomes to ≤ 100kb and > 100kb
# First for ≤ 100kb

faFilter -maxSize=100000 dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta \
> faSize dmel_less.fasta

# For > 100kb
faFilter -minSize=100001 dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta \
> faSize dmel_more.fasta
ls


# Trying another way for partition (will only use faSize partition version for remaining homework):
bioawk -c fastx 'length($seq) <= 100000{ print ">"$name; print $seq }'  *.fasta \
> sample_less 
bioawk -c fastx 'length($seq) > 100000{ print ">"$name; print $seq }'  *.fasta \
> sample_more

# To calculate total nucleotides, Ns, and sequences
faSize dmel_less.fasta
faSize dmel_more.fasta

# Another way to solve for total number of nucleotides
bioawk -c fastx '{ print $name, length($seq) }' dmel_less.fasta
bioawk -c fastx '{ print $name, length($seq) }' dmel_more.fasta

# Another way to solve for total number of Ns
bioawk -t -c fastx 'END {print NR}' dmel_less.fasta
bioawk -t -c fastx 'END {print NR}' dmel_more.fasta

```
**For ≤ 100 kb**
1. Total nucleotides: 6178042
2. Total Ns: 662593
3. Total sequences: 1863

**For > 100 kb**
1. Total nucleotides: 137547960
2. Total Ns: 490385
3. Total sequences: 7


## Plots of the following for the whole genome, for all sequences ≤ 100kb, and all sequences > 100kb:

**Hint:** bioawk has a function called gc(). Don't forget about the CDF plotting utility we used in class.
1. Sequence length distribution
2. Sequence GC% distribution
3. Cumulative genome size sorted from largest to smallest sequences

Because the calculations will be for the whole genome and two genome partitions, there will be **9 total plots**.

### Sequence Length Distribution
```sh
module load perl
module load jje/jjeutils/0.1a
module load rstudio/0.99.9.9

# sequence length distribution 
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel_less.fasta > leng_less.txt
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel_more.fasta > leng_more.txt
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta > leng_whole.txt

R
library(ggplot2)

# ≤ 100 kb
leng_less <- read.table("leng_less.txt", header = FALSE)
View(leng_less) # If you are running in X2go, good to look at data and make sure the formatting looks correct
leng_less$seq_Percentcut <-cut(x=leng_less[,1], breaks = 750)
ggplot(data = leng_less)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(seq_Percentcut)) + labs(title="Sequence Length ≤ 100kb", x="Sequence", y="Count (Number of Contigs)")+ theme_bw()+ theme(axis.text.x = element_text (angle = 90, hjust = 1)) 
ggsave("leng_less.png")

# > 100 kb

leng_more <- read.table("leng_more.txt", header = FALSE)
View(leng_more) # If you are running in X2go, good to look at data and make sure the formatting looks correct
leng_more$seq_Percentcut <-cut(x=leng_more[,1], breaks = 17)
ggplot(data = leng_more)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(seq_Percentcut)) + labs(title="Sequence Length > 100kb", x="Sequence", y="Count (Number of Contigs)")+ theme_bw()+ theme(axis.text.x = element_text (angle = 90, hjust = 1))  
ggsave("leng_more.png")

# whole genome

leng_whole <- read.table("leng_whole.txt", header = FALSE)
View(leng_whole) # If you are running in X2go, good to look at data and make sure the formatting looks correct
leng_whole$seq_Percentcut <-cut(x=leng_whole[,1], breaks = 100000)
ggplot(data = leng_whole)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(seq_Percentcut)) + labs(title="Whole Genome Sequence Length", x="Sequence", y="Count (Number of Contigs)")+ theme_bw()+ theme(axis.text.x = element_text (angle = 90, hjust = 1))  
ggsave("leng_whole.png")

q()
```

### GC% Distribution

```sh
# GC% Distribution

module load jje/jjeutils/0.1a
module load rstudio/0.99.9.9

# Need to first generate GC txt files for all of them before going into R
# ≤ 100kb
bioawk -c fastx '{ print $name, gc($seq) }' dmel_less.fasta > GC_less.txt

# > 100kb
bioawk -c fastx '{ print $name, gc($seq) }' dmel_more.fasta > GC_more.txt

# whole genome 
bioawk -c fastx '{ print $name, gc($seq) }' dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta > GC_whole.txt

R # everything hereafter should be in R
library(ggplot2)

# GC for ≤ 100 kb
GC_less <- read.table("GC_less.txt", header = FALSE)
View(GC_less) # If you are running in X2go, good to look at data and make sure the formatting looks correct
GC_less$GC_Percentcut <-cut(x=GC_less[,2], breaks = 11)
View(GC_less)
ggplot(data = GC_less)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(GC_Percentcut)) + labs(title="GC Distribution ≤ 100kb", x="GC Percentage", y="Count (Number of Contigs)") 
ggsave("GC_less.png")

# GC for > 100 kb
GC_more <- read.table("GC_more.txt", header = FALSE)
View(GC_more)
GC_more$GC_Percentcut <-cut(x=GC_more[,2], breaks = 11)
View(GC_more)
ggplot(data = GC_more)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(GC_Percentcut)) + labs(title="GC Distribution > 100kb", x="GC Percentage", y="Count (Number of Contigs)") 
ggsave("GC_more.png")

# GC for whole genome
GC_whole <- read.table("GC_whole.txt", header = FALSE)
View(GC_whole) 
GC_whole$GC_Percentcut <-cut(x=GC_whole[,2], breaks = 15)
View(GC_whole)
ggplot(data = GC_whole)+ geom_bar(mapping = aes(GC_Percentcut)) + labs(title="Whole Genome GC Distribution", x="GC Percentage", y="Count (Number of Contigs)") 
ggsave("GC_whole.png")

q()
```

### Cumulative Genome Size Distribution 
```sh
# Cumulative genome size largest to smallest
# ≤ 100kb
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel_less.fasta \
| sort -rn \
| awk ' BEGIN { print "Assembly\tLength\nkblength_Ctg\t0" } { print "kblength_Ctg\t" $1 } ' \
>  seq_dmel_less.lengths
plotCDF2 seq_dmel_less.lengths seq_less.png

# > 100kb
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel_more.fasta \
| sort -rn \
| awk ' BEGIN { print "Assembly\tLength\nkblength_Ctg\t0" } { print "kblength_Ctg\t" $1 } ' \
>  seq_dmel_more.lengths
plotCDF2 seq_dmel_more.lengths seq_more.png

# whole genome
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta \
| sort -rn \
| awk ' BEGIN { print "Assembly\tLength\nkblength_Ctg\t0" } { print "kblength_Ctg\t" $1 } ' \
>  seq_dmel_all.lengths
plotCDF2 seq_dmel_all.lengths seq_all.png

ls -l *.png # There should be 9

```

### Comments on "Summarize partitions of a genome assembly"
Looks great from the code side. Please upload 9 output pngs with your homework and include them here in your markdown document.

# Genome Assembly

## Assemble a genome from MinION reads
**Hint:** Read up on miniasm here. We're using one of the simplest assembly approaches possible. This assembly can literally be accomplished with three lines of code. This will literally take only 3 command lines.
Download the reads from here
Use minimap to overlap reads
Use miniasm to construct an assembly

```sh
pwd
mkdir assembly
cd assembly

### THIS PART TAKES A RIDICULOUSLY LONG TIME
module load jje/jjeutils
wget https://hpc.oit.uci.edu/~solarese/ee282/iso1_onp_a2_1kb.fastq.gz 
# Trying script from class
minimap=$(which minimap)
miniasm=$(which miniasm)
basedir=/pub/jje/ee282/$USER
projname=nanopore_assembly1
basedir=$basedir/$projname
raw=$basedir/$projname/data/raw
processed=$basedir/$projname/data/processed
figures=$basedir/$projname/output/figures
reports=$basedir/$projname/output/reports

createProject $projname $basedir
ln -sf /bio/share/solarese/hw4/rawdata/iso1_onp_a2_1kb.fastq $raw/reads.fq

$minimap -t 32 -Sw5 -L100 -m0 $raw/reads.fq{,} \
| gzip -1 \
> $processed/onp.paf.gz

$miniasm -f $raw/reads.fq $processed/onp.paf.gz \
> $processed/reads.gfa

```

## Assembly assessment
**Hint:** For MUMmer, you should run nucmer, delta-filter, and mummerplot.
1. Calculate the N50 of your assembly (this can be done with only faSize+awk+sort or with bioawk+awk+sort) and compare it to the Drosophila community reference's contig N50 (here)

```sh
# For calculating n50
n50 () {
  bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq); n=n+length($seq); } END { print n; } ' $1 \
  | sort -rn \
  | gawk ' NR == 1 { n = $1 }; NR > 1 { ni = $1 + ni; } ni/n > 0.5 { print $1; exit; } '
}

awk ' $0 ~/^S/ { print ">" $2" \n" $3 } ' $processed/reads.gfa \
| tee >(n50 /dev/stdin > $reports/n50.txt) \
| fold -w 60 \
> $processed/unitigs.fa

n50 dmell-all-cntg-r6.24.fa # should give you n50 number; In our case it is 21485538, need to first jump ahead to next question to generate the contig assembly

```
2. Compare your assembly to the contig assembly (not the scaffold assembly!) from Drosophila melanogaster on FlyBase using a dotplot constructed with MUMmer (Hint: use faSplitByN as demonstrated in class)

```sh
# Need to first make a contig assembly

module load jje/jjeutils perl
faSplitByN dmel-all-chromosome-r6.24.fasta dmel-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24.fasta 10

# Will do mummer in another folder as a job
mkdir mummer
ln -s /pub/jje/ee282/bsorouri/nanopore_assembly1/nanopore_assembly1/data/processed/unitigs.fa
ln -s /pub/jje/ee282/bsorouir/hmwk4/dmell-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24.fasta
ls
touch mummer.sh
nano mummer.sh # Copy and paste the content below into your shell script, afterwards save and exit out of shell script

#!/bin/bash
#
#$ -N mummer
#$ -q free128,free72i,free56i,free48i,free40i,free32i,free64
#$ -pe openmp 8
#$ -R Y

###Loading of binaries via module load or PATH reassignment
source /pub/jje/ee282/bin/.qmbashrc
module load gnuplot/4.6.0

###Query and Reference Assignment. State my prefix for output filenames
REF="dmel-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24.fasta"
PREFIX="flybase"
SGE_TASK_ID=1
QRY=$(ls u*.fa | head -n $SGE_TASK_ID | tail -n 1)
PREFIX=${PREFIX}_$(basename ${QRY} .fa)

###please use a value between 75-150 for -c. The value of 1000 is too strict.
nucmer -l 100 -c 125 -d 10 -banded -D 5 -prefix ${PREFIX} ${REF} ${QRY}
mummerplot --fat --layout --filter -p ${PREFIX} ${PREFIX}.delta \
  -R ${REF} -Q ${QRY} --png


#### This is after you saved and exited out ######

qsub mummer.sh

```

3. Compare your assembly to both the contig assembly and the scaffold assembly from the Drosophila melanogaster on FlyBase using a contiguity plot (Hint: use plotCDF2 as demonstrated in class and see this example)

```sh
bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' dmel-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24.fasta \
| sort -rn \
| awk ' BEGIN { print "Assembly\tLength\nFlyBase_Ctg\t0" } { print "FlyBase_Ctg\t" $1 } ' \
>  dmel-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24.lengths

bioawk -c fastx ' { print length($seq) } ' unitigs.fa \
| sort -rn \
| awk ' BEGIN { print "Assembly\tLength\nMinimap_Ctg\t0" } { print "Minimap_Ctg\t" $1 } ' \
> unitigs.lengths

plotCDF2 {dmel-all-chromosome-cntg-r6.24,unitigs}.lengths r6_v_minimap.png  
```

4. Calculate BUSCO scores of both assemblies and compare them

```sh

pwd # make sure you are in hmwk4 directory
touch busco_final8.sh
nano busco_final8.sh ##### Input and save the code below

#!/bin/bash
#
#$ -N busco8
#$ -q free128,free72i,free56i,free48i,free40i,free32i,free64
#$ -pe openmp 8
#$ -R Y
module load augustus/3.2.1
module load blast/2.2.31 hmmer/3.1b2 boost/1.54.0
source /pub/jje/ee282/bin/.buscorc

INPUTTYPE="geno"
MYLIBDIR="/pub/jje/ee282/bin/busco/lineages/"
MYLIB="diptera_odb9"
OPTIONS="-l ${MYLIBDIR}${MYLIB}"
##OPTIONS="${OPTIONS} -sp 4577"
QRY="unitigs.fa"
MYEXT=".fa" ###Please change this based on your qry file. I.e. .fasta or .fa or .gfa

#my busco run
##BUSCO.py -c 1 ${NSLOTS} -i ${QRY} -m ${INPUTTYPE} -o $(basename ${QRY} ${MYEXT})_${MYLIB}${SPTAG} ${OPTIONS}
BUSCO.py -f -c 1 -i ${QRY} -m ${INPUTTYPE} -o $(basename ${QRY} ${MYEXT})_${MYLIB}${SPTAG} ${OPTIONS}

################# After Saving And Exiting Out #####################

qsub busco_final8.sh
# Note: I used 8 nodes, because it was taking forever in the queue. It took longer to complete, but it still got done.

#### Alternative, manual way of running busco:
# Need to be careful how we log on and off, but can do the above script manually by first putting the code below, then continuing with the remainder of the code:
qrsh -q free128,free72i,free56i,free48i,free40i,free32i,free64 -pe openmp 32


```
**BUSCO Score Results:**

Results:

C:0.5%[S:0.5%,D:0.0%],F:1.1%,M:98.4%,n:2799

13 Complete BUSCOs (C)

13 Complete and single-copy BUSCOs (S)

0 Complete and duplicated BUSCOs (D)

32 Fragmented BUSCOs (F)

2754 Missing BUSCOs (M)

2799 Total BUSCO groups searched
